---
layout: post
title: "Mac Setup"
feature-img: "assets/img/rainbow.jpg"
thumbnail: "assets/img/turtle.jpg"
tags: [Mac, Software]
last_modified: 2026-01-17
---
This post contains details of how I set up my shell and environment. I use Windows, Mac, and Linux on a daily basis, so I have different setups for different purposes, but I try to make them similar when I can. You can see the [software I use](https://jss367.github.io/software-i-use.html) and [how I customize it](https://jss367.github.io/software-customizations.html) in the linked posts; this post will focus on setup.

<b>Table of Contents</b>
* TOC
{:toc}

## Shell

On Macs, I use [zsh](https://www.zsh.org/) as my main shell. It's the default shell now but older Macs will need to install it. My setup is based around `zsh`.

### Shell Configuration

I use [Oh My Zsh](https://ohmyz.sh/) to configure zsh and highly recommend it. You can check if it's installed with a simple `ls ~/.oh-my-zsh`.

#### Development Environment

I store my configuration files in a [dotfiles repo](https://github.com/jss367/dotfiles). I use symlinks from there so I can keep it under version control while using it.

I have a particular way I set up my development environment. I store all of my aliases and environment variables other than my passwords in a `~/.profile` file (symlinked from dotfiles). This way I can share it with a team and we can all have the same hotkeys. In `~/.profile`, I source a separate file called something like `.my_credentials`, which is where all my credentials are exported from.

I source `~/.profile` from whatever shell I'm using. If I'm using Oh My Zsh, I create a file that just says `source ~/.profile` and save it at `~/.oh-my-zsh/custom/profile.zsh`. Note that you need to do this even if you're using the dotfiles repo. I usually leave the `.zshrc` file alone, but you can customize the Oh My Zsh theme if you want. 

The full chain looks like this:

`~/.zshrc` -> `~/.oh-my-zsh/custom/profile.zsh` -> `~/.profile` -> `~/.my_credentials`
* Also `.profile` will source `.bash_profile` if it exists

* Note: `~/.zshrc` is actually a symlink to the .zshrc in my dotfiles repo.

##### Other Additions

Sometimes other applications will place information in your profile files. Some examples:

* brew puts something in `zprofile`
* conda adds to `.zshrc` or sometimes `.bash_profile` depending on how you install it.
* Google Cloud SDK also writes to your `.zshrc` file.

Even though I put my stuff in `.profile`, I generally allow other applications to modify files like `.zshrc`.

## Background

I switch my iTerm2 profile to Dark Background.

## Installing Homebrew

[Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) is the best package manager for Mac. It installs in `/usr/local` for macOS Intel and `/opt/homebrew` for Apple Silicon. You can run the right location either way with this:
```bash
# Set Homebrew path and run eval
HOMEBREW_PREFIX=$(brew --prefix)
if [[ -d "${HOMEBREW_PREFIX}" ]]; then
  eval "$("${HOMEBREW_PREFIX}/bin/brew" shellenv)"
fi
```

## Keyboard Customizations

Here are some things I like to change on Macs and here's how I do it:

* The cursor doesn't jump from word to word by default (at least, with oh-my-zsh)
  * To fix this, you need to add the following to your .profile:
```
bindkey "\e\e[D" backward-word
bindkey "\e\e[C" forward-word
```

In general, I want the control button to do much more:
* ctrl + w to close a web page
* ctrl + arrow key to jump to next word, both in terminal and in text editor in browser.



I do this to make it easier to navigate in terminals: [https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6205157/how-to-set-keyboard-shortcuts-to-jump-to-beginning-end-of-line/22312856#22312856](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6205157/how-to-set-keyboard-shortcuts-to-jump-to-beginning-end-of-line/22312856#22312856)
* also add ctrl+z for undo (so there are two ways to undo)


### Jumping around text

You'll find that whether you can jump around text depends on a specific application. For example, if you've done the above, you can use `control + shift` to highlight entire words in Gmail, but it doesn't work in all applications.


## Installing Anaconda

* In general, I recommend installing Anaconda for all users. If you do, it will be stored in:
```
/opt/anaconda3/bin/conda
/opt/anaconda3/condabin/conda
```

## Packages

There are a few packages I use to improve my terminal experience.

### powerlevel10k
* Be careful so install it through iTerm2, not through brew.

Then start a new terminal and it will walk through the configuration.

Some recommended settings:
* Classic (was Lean)
* Unicode
* 256 colors; Dark
* 12-hr format time
* Angled separator
* Flat prompt head and tail
* One line
* Compact
* Many icons (not sure about this)
* Fluent (not sure about this)
* No transient prompts

### Pygments

* [Pygments](https://pygments.org/), a Python syntax highlighter. It's like `cat` with colors. I alias it to `c` (as seen below).

### Autojump

* [autojump](https://github.com/wting/autojump)

### ZSH Syntax Highlighting

* [zsh-syntax-highlighting](https://github.com/zsh-users/zsh-syntax-highlighting)

To activate the syntax highlighting, add the following at the end of your .zshrc:
  `source /opt/homebrew/share/zsh-syntax-highlighting/zsh-syntax-highlighting.zsh`

If you receive "highlighters directory not found" error message,
you may need to add the following to your .zshenv:
  `export ZSH_HIGHLIGHT_HIGHLIGHTERS_DIR=/opt/homebrew/share/zsh-syntax-highlighting/highlighters`

## Shell Configuration

I use the shell configuration from [my dotfiles repo](https://github.com/jss367/dotfiles/blob/main/shell/profile).

## My .zshrc

Conda will install the initialization script for conda inside `.zshrc` (for Macs). It will depend on whether you installed Anaconda or Miniconda, and on whether you installed in for a single user or for all users. If it's installed for all users it will be somewhere like `/opt/anaconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh`. If it's just installed for one user it will be somewhere like `/Users/$USER/opt/anaconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh`. The whole initialization looks like one of the following (depending on whether you use Anaconda or Miniconda): 

```bash
# >>> conda initialize >>>
# !! Contents within this block are managed by 'conda init' !!
__conda_setup="$('/bin/conda' 'shell.bash' 'hook' 2> /dev/null)"
if [ $? -eq 0 ]; then
    eval "$__conda_setup"
else
    if [ -f "/home/jsimonelli/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh" ]; then
        . "/home/jsimonelli/miniconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh"
    else
        export PATH="/home/jsimonelli/miniconda3/bin:$PATH"
    fi
fi
unset __conda_setup
# <<< conda initialize <<<
```

```bash
# >>> conda initialize >>>
# !! Contents within this block are managed by 'conda init' !!
__conda_setup="$('/home/julius/anaconda3/bin/conda' 'shell.bash' 'hook' 2> /dev/null)"
if [ $? -eq 0 ]; then
    eval "$__conda_setup"
else
    if [ -f "/home/julius/anaconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh" ]; then
        . "/home/julius/anaconda3/etc/profile.d/conda.sh"
    else
        export PATH="/home/julius/anaconda3/bin:$PATH"
    fi
fi
unset __conda_setup
# <<< conda initialize <<<
```

It's fine to keep in there, but if you use `tmux`, you might run into a problem. `tmux` doesn't always source `.zshrc`. Sometimes it only sources `.profile`, so conda won't load in a tmux window. Even worse, it may pull Python from `/usr/bin/python`, which will be old Python 2 (use `which python` to see which Python is being used). So you might want to cut and paste the initialization over to .profile.

I have found that if I don't include `conda activate $DEFAULT_CONDA_ENVIRONMENT` in my `.zshrc`, it doesn't activate my default profile, even though I have this in my `.profile`. So I leave it in `.zshrc`.

Other stuff is added to `.zshrc` automatically as well. Things like `[ -f ~/.fzf.zsh ] && source ~/.fzf.zsh` automatically get added here. If you don't need it for `tmux`, you can leave it here. Otherwise I would recommend moving it all over to `.profile`.

## Alias Notes

If you make a shortcut to your code base like so:

`export BASE='$HOME/git'`

then if you want to use it in an alias you'll have to use double quotes.

Instead of `alias cdh=cd $BASE'` you'll have to use `alias cdh="cd $BASE"`

However, if you were just doing it with `$HOME`, it seems single quotes work.

## Finding How Things Got in Environment

If you want to find how something got in your conda environment, you could grep it like this:

`grep 'mysterious_message' ~/.bashrc ~/.bash_profile ~/.profile`



## Useful Git Commands

These are good to set to an alias
```
git log --pretty=format:'%C(yellow)%h %Cred%ad %Cblue%an%Cgreen%d %Creset%s' --date=short
```

Testing:
```bash
# set a fancy prompt (non-color, unless we know we "want" color)
case "$TERM" in
    xterm-color|*-256color) color_prompt=yes;;
esac
```

# Appendix

## Full .profile

My default .profile is available [here](https://github.com/jss367/dotfiles/blob/main/shell/profile).
